Good day i'm norman Wildberger today we're going
to have a further look at interval arithmetic
which rises naturally when we're doing scientific
measurements so the idea is that instead of doing
arithmetic with single numbers we can also think
about doing arithmetic with an interval maybe
the interval to 5 or the interval for 8 and so
on and it turns out that there are significant
differences depending on whether we're thinking
about intervals of natural numbers or intervals of
integers and intervals of rational numbers which
we'll also introduced later on is very similar to
intervals of integers I'm also going to change
my notation a little bit this is a suggestion
of a viewer Peter high 503 I thank you it's a
good idea I think to rethink notation every so
often and ask ourselves are the terms that we're
using really the right ones the best ones for our
practice so he suggested that instead of talking
about a natural number interval with this name
num interval which I talked about last time that
we rather use interval net where net is short for
natural numbers now I've been thinking about
making this change myself actually for a while
because when we started off introducing numbers
the first numbers that we considered were the
natural numbers and we just called them num and
um for short but later on when we introduced
other number systems it was clear that num was
just one of many possible number systems perhaps
the primary one but nevertheless still one of
many and so it makes sense to give it some more
descriptive name so NAT is something that we're
going to be now using instead of num okay so that
means the type of natural number 1 2 3 4 5 and
I'll just put the the type of number that we're
talking about after the interval so we're talking
about a neutral of natural numbers or an interval
of integers this also more or less parallels
with what we were doing with Pauli numbers we
had poly Nam before and now we can talk about
poly net or poly int alright so let me remind
you of the the basic idea so an interval gnat
or an interval over the natural numbers is by
definition an expression like this an expression
involving two natural numbers m and n and with the
requirement that the first one m is less than
or equal to the second one and now now we had
a definition of addition of such intervals here
is the definition we just basically add the two
elements in the first position and we also
add the two elements in the second position
and multiplication is exactly the same so these
definitions are not arbitrary but they rather
correspond to a very natural scientific process
so the the justification for these definitions is
as follows suppose for example that we have two
five and four eight and we're interested in the
sum to five plus four eight arithmetic Li this is
going to be 6 13 what does it mean geometrically
or scientifically well 2 5 represents a range
of values it represents any one of the natural
numbers which are contained in this segment
from 2 to 5 inclusive so we can think about
this interval in our minds as representing any one
of these four natural numbers and 4 8 represents
any one of these numbers 4 5 6 7 8 and when
we're adding this interval with this interval
in our minds what we can think about is we're
taking a random element in this first interval
and another random element in this second interval
and we're adding them and we're seeing what are
the possible range of values of that arbitrary
sum for example if we added two and four well
then we would get six if we took three and seven
we would get 10 if we took five and eight we would
get 13 altogether the range of values that we get
stretches from six which is the minimum occurring
when you take 2 plus 4 all the way up to 13 which
is the other extreme when you take the largest one
in this interval 5 and the largest one in this
interval 8 and add them so that's the meaning
of addition at least it corresponds to a certain
amount of uncertainty in addition so we're adding
some number which belongs to this interval to
some number which belongs to this interval and
asking what are the range of possible sums that
we can obtain and the story is very similar for
multiplication when we multiply the interval
1 3 for example by the interval 2 5 arithmetic
aliy we get 1 times 2 3 times 5 and what that
corresponds to geometrically or scientifically
is we're allowing ourselves to choose any number
in this first interval 1 3 so either 1 2 or 3 and
we're allowing ourselves to choose any number in
this interval to 5 so 2 3 4 or 5 and then you can
multiply those two numbers together the range of
possible values goes from the smallest would be
1 times 2 the largest would be 3 times 5 so you
can go all the way from 2 up to 15 it's important
to observe that not all values are possible we
for example cannot obtain 11 as a product of
something in here times something in here so we
don't need to be able to get every number in this
final interval we just need to be able to say what
the range of possible values is we're saying that
any number that we get by taking a number in here
and a number in here and multiplying them will
necessarily be in there and this is sort of the
smallest interval that has that property okay so
here's a generalization of what I just said it's
a little theorem that if we have two intervals
with natural number entries and M belongs to I
when other words M has property I and I remind
you this is our notation for thinking about the
interval as a property of natural numbers so M
has property I means exactly that M is between
the bounds of I it's greater than or equal to
the leftmost entry of I and less than or equal
to the rightmost entry so if we have M belonging
to I and n belong to J then M plus n belongs to
I plus J and M times n belongs to I times J we
could in addition say a little bit more we could
also say that I plus J is actually the smallest
interval that has that property and I times J
is the smallest interval that has this property
so let's have a look at a few examples of
how we might use this interval arithmetic
suppose that tom has between 10 and 12 apples
and when I say that I mean he could have 10
he could have 11 we could have 12 so between
means including 10 and 12 and that he also has
between 25 and 30 oranges then how many
pieces of fruit does he have altogether
well the interval 1012 represents the quantity of
apples that he has the interval 2530 represents
the number of oranges he has if we add these two
intervals using interval arithmetic we get 10 plus
25 is 35 12 plus 30 is 42 and so the total number
of fruit that he has is somewhere between 35
and 40 - that's sort of the minimum possible and
that's the maximum possible here's another example
su has between 6 and 8 coins in her pocket and
the coins are either nickels worth 5 cents dimes
worth 10 cents or quarters worth 25 cents we'd
like to know how much money does she have in her
pocket well we can't say for sure because there's
uncertainty there's uncertainty in two different
ways we're not sure how many coins she actually
has and we're not sure which coins she actually
has nevertheless the range of coins that she has
is represented by the interval six eight and the
range of values of the coins is represented by the
interval five twenty five and if we multiply these
two we get the minimum would be thirty the maximum
would be 8 times 25 which is 200 this is telling
us that she has between 30 cents and two dollars
in her pocket so the minimum would be that she has
the minimum number of coins of the minimum value
so six times five and maximum would be the maximum
number of coins times the maximum number of values
which would be 200 or two dollars here's another
example that might come up in a sort of scientific
situation we have a very simple electric circuit
and Ohm's law tells us that if we have a voltage
v here represented by some kind of battery perhaps
we have a current I going through our wire and we
have some resistance maybe a little lamp that's
being lit up there value R then the voltage
is the current times the resistance there's
a fundamental law in electricity so suppose that
in this particular situation the eye is measured
by someone and we find that it's more or less -
but more specifically we know that it's - within
a certain range so it's to plus or minus 0.1
and current is usually expressed in amps so
this would be 2 amps with a little bit of error
point one possible error in either direction
and suppose we also know that the resistance
which is usually measured in ohms happens to be
7 resistance of this lamp is 7 but there's also
a little bit of error perhaps plus or minus 0.5
we'd like to know so okay what is the voltage
well the naive thing to do is to say well it's
I times RI is more or less - R is more or less
7 so I times R is 2 times 7 or 14 the voltage is
14 and that's roughly correct but it doesn't take
into consideration the errors that we have in both
of these quantities so a more refined analysis
might use interval arithmetic this current here
is actually represented by this interval one point
nine two two point one the resistance is measured
or represented by this interval six point five two
seven point five if we multiply them because we're
multiplying current times resistance then the
lowest value is 1.9 times six point five which
is twelve point three five and the top value here
is two point one times seven point five which is
fifteen point seven five so in fact the range of
possible voltages goes from the minimum of twelve
point three five up to a maximum of fifteen point
seven five and if we wanted to express this in a
way that's sort of similar to to this what we
could do is we could take the average of these
two values so exactly the halfway point which we
get by adding them up and then dividing by two
and that turns out to be fourteen point oh five
and then the difference between that midpoint
and either this end point or that end point is
one point seven so another way of saying it is
that the voltage is fourteen point oh five that's
sort of the central value plus or minus one point
seven possible in either direction no just as a
bit of an aside this one point seven sort of the
amount of error that's involved in the voltage
you might ask well how does that come about from
the error in the current which was point one and
the error in the resistance which was 0.5 and the
kind of a clue there is to note that if you take
seven times point one you get point seven and if
you take point five times two you get one so
this error here can sort of be thought of as
seven times this error and two times this error so
the errors are kind of combining to give you the
error in the product alright so I think this
makes it very clear that sort of an interval
arithmetic point of view can help and clarify what
goes on in a scientific experiment or measurement
and it also illustrates that even though we may
have a situation with some uncertainty we can
deal with that uncertainty in a more precise
way by talking about intervals so let's talk
about the laws of arithmetic for intervals with
natural numbers there are the commutative laws
the I plus J equals J plus I and that I times J
equals J times I I and J are two natural number
in tools there's associative laws that I plus
J plus K is the same as I plus J plus K and
similarly for multiplication that I times J times
K equals I times J times K and a distributive law
that I times J plus K equals I times J plus
I times K now these laws all follow from the
corresponding laws in the natural numbers I remind
you the natural numbers used to be referred to as
this type and now we'll probably more use n84
the natural numbers and the reason is because
the multiplication and the addition of intervals
is done component-wise the leftmost entries are
being added or multiplied exactly as usual and the
rightmost entries are being added or multiplied
just as usual so if you think about it the the
standard laws here apply to the left most entry
in the the sum or the product and they apply to
the rightmost entry in the sum of the product sort
of separately and so it's straightforward that
these laws are going to be working for example
the distributive law here's just an example we're
multiplying 1 3 times the sum of 2 5 + 4 6 2 5 + 4
6 is 6 11 when we multiply that by 1 3 we get 6
33 on the other hand 1 3 times 2 5 + 1 3 times
4 6 will give us this product is 215 this product
is 4 18 when we add them we get 6 33 another point
out that the element 1 1 is playing the role of
the number 1 because 1 1 times any interval MN
is MN and I also point out that if we extend
our numbers just a little bit by adding 0 as
well then we can also talk about this element 0
0 that interval and that has the property that
when we added to any interval we get the other
interval so the laws of arithmetic for natural
number intervals are very simple they are really
just exactly the same as the laws of arithmetic
for natural numbers however for intervals using
integers the story is a little bit different so
now let's talk about interval take for integer
intervals intervals whose endpoints are integers
so including negative numbers the addition of
such intervals is the simplest operation and
it's the same as for natural number intervals we
just add component wise and the reason is I think
geometrically pretty easy to understand suppose
for example we have the interval minus 3/2 and
we're adding the interval 4/7 so there's minus
3/2 which we can represent geometrically as the
range of values from minus 3 up to 2 so 1 2 3 4 5
6 any one of those 6 values for 7 represents this
range 4 5 6 or 7 now if you take a number in this
range and another number in this range and you
add them then what are the range of possibilities
well the smallest value you can get is by taking
the smallest number here and the smallest number
here minus 3 plus 4 so the smallest number you
could get would be 1 the biggest value you could
get would be to take the biggest number here and
the biggest number there and add them you would
get 9 so that's why we define the addition this
way because it reflects this idea of taking
a random or an unknown number in the first
interval an unknown number in the second interval
and adding those two unknown numbers subtraction
was a little bit more unobvious a B minus C D is a
minus d B minus C let's understand the reason for
this definition by looking at a picture so here's
an example minus 1 3 minus the interval minus 2
4 so where are they here's our line and minus 1 3
that's this interval right here from minus 1 up to
3 so any one of these values here minus 1 0 1 2 or
3 and minus 2 for that going from minus two up to
four that's in green here any one of those values
so what we're doing is we're taking a first number
somewhere in this range and then we're taking a
second number somewhere in this range now we're
taking the first number minus the second number
and asking what are the possible range of values
that we can get well what's the smallest possible
value we can get the smallest possible value we
can get is we if we start with the smallest value
in the first interval and we end up subtracting
the largest possible value in the second interval
so if we take minus one and we subtract four then
we go all the way down to minus five that's the
smallest number we can get so that's this number
minus this number or a minus D and what is the
biggest number we could get so we're starting
taking one of these numbers and subtracting one of
these numbers the biggest number we can get is by
taking the largest one of these numbers which is
three and subtracting the smallest one of these
numbers which is minus 2 so 3 minus -2 actually
gets us up to five so this minus this value is the
largest possible value so that's the B minus
C term that's appearing there so this is the
justification for this definition this definition
is not arbitrary it reflects what actually happens
when you have two intervals and you take a number
from one interval and subtract another number from
the second interval and ask what are the range of
possibilities for that difference so last time I
gave you an exercise to try to figure out what the
definition of multiplication of two such integer
intervals might be and it's a little bit more
challenging to come up with that in fact it's
not easy to give a concrete formula in terms of
one of the is times the other kamo one of these
times the other we actually have to have a much
more flexible attitude what we need to do is we
need to take all possible products of these two
elements with these two elements so a times C a
times D B times C and B times D we have to take
those four products we have to look at those four
numbers and we have to choose the minimum of
those four numbers that's the left end point
and we have to choose the maximum of those four
numbers and that's the right end point now that's
probably the simplest way of saying how you
define the product of two integer intervals
so it's a little more subtle and why do we need to
do this well I'm going to give you some examples
here to illustrate that various possibilities
can occur all right and in fact when you were
doing this exercise probably this is the first
thing you should have done you should have said
well let's have a look at some examples and see
what happens in a variety of examples to get the
hang of it it's just generally the best way of
trying to understand a pattern that we're not
that familiar with work through some examples list
them organize them in a nice way and have a look
at what's going on so for example minus 1/2 times
3/5 the idea is still the same we want to talk
about what are the range of possibilities if we
take one number in this interval and another in
number in this interval and we multiply them
what is the range of possible values that we
can get and that's the same as asking what's the
smallest possible value we can get and what's the
greatest possible value we can get well in this
situation the smallest possible value is going to
be a negative number when you multiply this -1 by
not by 3 but actually by 5 because that will give
you minus 5 which is smaller than minus 3 and
the biggest possible value out of these 4 is 2
times 5 so in this case the endpoints are minus
1 times 5 and two times five the three is being
completely ignored here's another example - four
- three times one two what's the smallest possible
value you can get the smallest possible values
minus four times two well the biggest possible
value is well it's going to be a negative
number because this is always negative and
this is always positive so it's always got to
be a negative number so we're looking for the
biggest negative number and that's going to be
minus three times one or minus three so in this
case it's minus four times two as one endpoint
and minus three times one as the other endpoint
now let you check the other cases with minus 5
1 times minus 2 3 the smallest value is minus
5 3 and the largest value happens to be minus 5
times minus 2 here the smallest value is 2 times
minus 6 the largest value is minus 1 times minus
6 here the smallest value is 0 times while any one
of these so zero and largest value is is minus
seven times minus one and here where you have
a minus 2 times minus 1 that's a 2 and largest
value minus 3 times minus 4 is 12 and now let's
check the associative law see if that's gonna
hold because this is a rather complicated type
of multiplication so it's much less obvious now
that associativity is going to hold commutativity
is pretty clear because it's sort of symmetrical
these four numbers that we get don't change if you
swap those intervals by the associativity let's
have a look here's an example minus 3 1 x minus
2 4 x minus 5 minus 1 the product here is so the
smallest possible value is minus 12 the biggest
possible value is 6 that times this and they're
looking at these two the smallest possible value
would be 6 times minus 5 that's minus 30 the
biggest possible value would be minus 12 times
minus 5 or 60 the other way around with this
product in brackets this product is smallest
possible value would be minus 20 biggest possible
value would be plus 10 so that times minus 3 1 and
then the smallest possible value is minus 30
and the biggest possible value is 60 it looks
like associativity works so what do the laws of
arithmetic look like for this interval arithmetic
with integers well there's the commutative laws
they're the same as with natural numbers and we
have associative laws it turns out that both
associative laws work even in this interval
over integers situation and this one here is the
one that requires some discussion B this one here
is kind of obvious but the associative law for
multiplication how can we see that suppose the
intervals happen to be a b c d and e F now what
you should think about is you should think of all
the eight numbers that you can get by multiplying
one of these endpoints with one of these endpoints
with one of these endpoints so a times C times
E or a times C times F a times D times E or a
times D times F or B times C times E or B times C
times F or B times D times E or B times D times F
the endpoints of both of these intervals are going
to belong to these lists and both of these lists
belong to both of these products for example say
BD e why does that belong to here well because BD
is one of the possible products of I times J and
so it since it's one of the possible products of
I times J when we multiply it by e we get one
of the possible products BD times e in i times
times K and why is the same BDE appearing in here
well because de is one of the possible products
when we must buy J times K and so B times D times
e is going to be one of the possible products when
we get when we take this time the product of
these two so it's by looking at these various
eight possible end points and seeing that they're
in both of these things that we can see that the
two different associative products agree although
it is definitely a little bit more subtle than it
is in the natural number situation and what about
the distributive law so the usual distributive law
does not hold for integer intervals but a slightly
weaker version of it the sub distributive law does
hold and here's what it is but if you have three
integrals I J and K and you multiply I times J
plus K that that's contained in I cross J plus I
times K and by that we mean that any number which
belongs to this thing belongs to this thing let's
illustrate it with an example minus 2 1 times
minus 5 minus 1 plus minus 1 3 the sum of these
two is minus 6 2 and then when we look at the
product here the smallest possible value we can
get is 1 times minus 6 the largest possible value
is minus 2 times minus 6 or 12 the right-hand side
minus 2 times minus 5 minus 1 plus minus 2 1 times
minus 1 3 what's that this product is minus 5 10
because the smallest value is minus 5 the largest
value is 10 this product is minus 6 3 because
the smallest value is minus 6 and the largest
value is 3 well when we add these we get minus 11
13 and so we do indeed see that this interval is
contain in this interval and that's before we can
remark that these two particular intervals play an
important special role they're playing the role
of the numbers zero and one zero zero plus any
interval is the same interval zero zero times and
the interval is 0 0 and 1 1 times any interval is
the interval in fact the integers themselves are
sort of sitting inside this interval arithmetic
just as those intervals of the form and n so
we're getting an extension of the arithmetic
of the integers to the sort of larger somewhat
more ambiguous intervals when we move from
integer intervals to rational number intervals
much of the story doesn't change so the various
laws having to do with addition multiplication
subtraction are exactly the same as they are for
the integer intervals the difference however is
that now the possibility of division enters the
picture because that's the operation we can
do with rational numbers that we couldn't do
with integers so without going through all the
details formally I think you can get the idea
the rational intervals or intervals with rational
coefficients are expressions that look like this
square brackets rational number comma rational
number where this rational number is less than or
equal to this rational number addition is defined
just as before it's this plus this comma this plus
this multiplication is defined in the same way as
it was for integer intervals we have to look to
see which of the four products is the smallest and
which of the four products is the biggest so with
these examples the smallest value would be when
we take this minus sign here and multiply it by
3/4 so minus 3/4 times minus one-third would be
minus 1/4 and the largest possible value we get
when we multiply 3/4 with one giving us 3/16 now
what about division can we divide this interval
by this one well that would mean that we take some
arbitrary rational number in here some arbitrary
rational number in here and perform the division
and see one of the range of possible values well
unfortunately that's a little bit problematic
here because in this interval is the number zero
so one of the numbers in here is zero and we're
not very happy about dividing by zero so we're
going to exclude this as a possibility we'll say
that we are not allowed to divide by an interval
which contains zero in it however the other way
around would work here's an interval containing
zero but this interval doesn't contain zero so we
can divide this by this and what should that mean
well again it's the same idea we look to see
what are the range of possible values if you
take some number in here and divide it by some
number in here what's the biggest possible value
you could get what's the smallest possible value
you could get well let's start with a smallest
possible value the smallest possible value let's
see if we divide this by this it's really the same
as multiplying by the reciprocal so that would
be minus two-thirds if we divided this by this
well we get the reciprocal so before nights'
minus 4/9 that's bigger than minus two-thirds
this divided by this or this divided this would
be positive so that's not going to help us minus
two-thirds is the smallest possible value and the
biggest possible value well when we divide this
by the smaller of these two we're going to get 1/4
divided by half that's same as 1/4 times 2 or 1/2
that's bigger than if we had divided it by this
in which case we would have gotten 1/3 so there
is an introduction to interval arithmetic which
has been discovered and rediscovered probably
many times in the course of mathematics and there
are some articles and perhaps even books that are
written on this subject it's useful for us for
a number of reasons first of all it gives us the
orientation that scientific work is important
even if you're a pure mathematician it's good
to orient ourselves towards scientific work
towards empirical observations and if we have
a mathematics that corresponds well to what a
scientist is doing out there in the real world
hey that's a good thing it also emphasizes for
us the importance of intervals the idea that we
can capture uncertainty in a precise kind of
way by working with intervals in some sense
analysis is all about intervals it's about errors
uncertainty and try to control them we'll talk
more about that and we'll see the importance
of intervals as we proceed further on I want
to finish today's lecture by having a look at
those two questions that I gave you last time
having to do with a simple computation over the
rational numbers and another simple computation
supposedly over their real numbers so last
time I asked you two questions one over the
rational numbers and one over the so-called real
numbers let's have a look at those two questions
the first one was to calculate or find the sum
1/2 plus 1/3 plus 1/4 and I asked you to write
the answer down and circle it let's do that ok so
to calculate this I need to know something and I
need to do something I need to know that I need
to get this over a common denominator and I'll
use the least common multiple of 2 three and four
which is twelve so in my mind I'll convert these
two fractions with a 12 in the denominator 6 over
12 4 over 12 and 3 over 12 and then I'll add the
numerators 6 4 & 3 to get 13 so the answer will
be 13 over 12 and we'll circle it and we will
feel happy because we've actually done something
we've actually made a calculation we've gotten an
answer that can be checked that was the first
question the second question I asked you was
over the real numbers now you probably know by
now that I don't believe in the real numbers I
think that modern mathematics is seriously astray
in its denial of the problems with real numbers
and a very sloppy logic that has pervaded a lot of
mathematics coming from thinking unclearly about
real numbers it's a very sad situation in fact and
many mathematicians and students have been almost
programmed to think incorrectly about these things
and to not look in that direction to even see that
they have logical problems so I want to weaken
this idea I'm not gonna be able to do this so
quickly so I'm gonna have to kind of slowly shake
these false ideas from you planting seeds in your
minds so this is one of these attempts I asked you
to calculate to find the sum of arguably the three
simplest irrational numbers which are square
root of 2 pi and E so what do you have to do
in order to calculate that sum it's a calculation
I wonder how many of you wrote down an answer and
circled it if you did my guess is this is what
you would have done this is the standard response
there is no better way of expressing this that
is at least known to mankind and so when it's
forced to simply repeat to the question
to get the answer it's a vacuous kind of
empty arithmetic that doesn't leave us with a
very good feeling we feel as if somehow we're
cheating we don't really know what's going on both
feelings are more or less correct all right I'm
gonna be saying a lot more about real numbers
later but I just want to plant the seeds that
all is not well in the happy land of modern
analysis roughly speaking the thing doesn't
work okay eventually we're gonna be talking
a lot about real numbers I'm gonna lay it all
out on the table we're going to look at it in
great detail we're gonna roll up our sleeves
nothing is gonna be left under the carpet okay
so we're slowly moving towards that but I want
to establish some positive things first so that
when we move modern analysis to the side there
will be something else that we can have in its
place okay so next time we're going to look at
Isaac Newton's famous algorithm for finding the
zeros of a function we're going to apply Newton's
method to talking about poly numbers and then two
algebraic curves very important algorithm very
interesting stuff so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening